are the stories from the road of an
automotive diagnostic robot from the
future to discover new problems and new
vehicles and to go where no other robot
has gone before this robot was called to
a shop for a know start on a 97 Isuzu
Rodeo with a 3.2 liter the shop had just
replaced the engine and now the vehicle
had a no spark and no injector pulse
condition the shop checked all wiring
harness connections on the engine but
could not come up with a solution this
is the type of situation we have all
been in at one time or another and it is
not a pleasant one especially if you
have a customer breathing down your neck
the shop was pressed for time so they
decided to call me and for technical
support when I arrived at the shop I
first did a visual inspection on the
rodeo and everything seemed to be in
order I placed my scanner on the vehicle
to see if the ECM was functioning I did
have communication and all the data was
within specification but the ECM failed
to fire the individual coils and
injectors when I cranked the engine I
placed my scope unit on the vehicle to
prove out the harness I wanted to check
all powers and grounds to make sure the
ACM had what it needed I placed the
scope and sweep mode and all the wires
passed with flying colors
I knew the ACM needed the proper rpm
signals before it could perform a task
so my next move was to monitor the crank
and cam signals to make sure they were
toggling at the proper thresholds and
frequency I also needed to see if the
crank and cam signals were in proper
synchronization with one another
I placed the scope and waveform viewer
and selected the crank hand cam signals
I cranked the engine and the signals
seemed to be correct at this point my
robotic memory did not have a good
waveform for this vehicle to compare
notes on so I had to go with what I had
by the looks of things it seemed like
the ECM was that fault but I still
needed to go further I proved that the
signals looked good but I could not be
sure if the signals were in sync
I pulled the timing cover so that I
could inspect the timing belt and gear
to shaft orientation for flaws I then
proceeded to inspect the timing belt I
was surprised to find everything was in
order at this point I was running out of
algorithmic ideas it seemed like I was
hitting a dead end in all directions I
left the shop to hopefully regroup my
robotic thought process to come up with
a new game plan for my next visit
I finished the day out but I still had
this Isuzu in the back of my processor
mind I decided to go home to my team Ken
and do some digging for information to
help me build my next plan of attack the
next day I woke up with another plan
this was a rebuilt engine what if the
crankshaft was not machined to the specs
of the old one I had an idea I called
the shop and told them to pull the
crankshaft sensor and turn the
crankshaft so the double notch on the
crank pulse ring lined up with the hole
then I told them to mark where the
position of the crankshaft keyway was in
relation to the engine block markings
next I told them to do the same with the
old engine just to see if the pulse
rings were synced properly on their
shafts as far-fetched as this seemed it
was all this robot had to offer
the shot later called me back and told
me they found the problem
they would not tell me over the Airways
but only said to bring your camera when
I got there I could see the mechanic was
very sad and he handed me a suicidal
drawing Oh No
this prepared me for what I was about to
see by looking at the old crankshaft
pulse ring you could see the major
difference with a pulse ring in the
rebuilt engine the rebuilder had given
the shop a 93-95 isuzu 3.2 liter engine
instead of 96 99 application the
difference was only in the crankshaft
design where Isuzu changed the strategy
of the rpm signals what a mechanic's
nightmare this brings to life the true
meaning of getting the shaft a lesson to
be learned of how we need to be more
cautious and alert to the parts we
purchase about two week later I returned
to the shop after they installed another
engine at a cost to the rebuilder I
hooked up my multi-channel scope once
more to get a good waveform of the crank
M signals for my library collection as
you can see from the waveform the crank
signal has multiple pulses followed by
one large sync pulse
unlike the pattern on the rebuilt engine
where there were only five single pulses
followed by a double pulse this is what
the ECM was looking for this robot will
now power down for a recharge will I
dream I don't know see you next time